BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY AND THE BENTHIC ZONE

Oceanography is the scientific field that studies and describes oceans and seas in all their aspects. Biological oceanography specifically studies life in the oceans and seas and its relationship with the surrounding environment.

The Benthic Zone: The benthic zone refers to the seafloor region extending from the shoreline to the deepest parts of the sea. The community of animals and plants living in this zone is called benthos.

Classification of Benthos by Size: Macrobenthos consists of organisms larger than 2 mm, retained on a sieve with a 2 mm mesh; this group includes large algae, mussels, starfish, various crustaceans, some fish species, worms, sea urchins, corals, and sponges. Meiobenthos consists of organisms between 0.1 mm and 2 mm in size, retained on a 0.1 mm sieve; this group includes various protozoa, flatworms, roundworms, small crustaceans, and some arthropods. Microbenthos consists of organisms smaller than 0.1 mm, passing through a 0.1 mm sieve; this group includes various bacteria, fungi, diatoms, and some algae species.

Biological Forms of Benthic Organisms: Sessile forms are organisms that attach themselves to a hard surface and remain fixed there. Pivotan forms remain motionless on soft substrates such as sand or mud. Sedentary forms are benthic organisms that move short distances when conditions require it.

Fish: A fish is a cold-blooded vertebrate that can only live in water, usually with skin covered by scales, that moves by swimming using fins and body muscle contractions. Fish are the most species-rich group of living vertebrates, represented by roughly 20,000 species. In taxonomy, all organisms are named with two names, a genus and a species, known as binomial nomenclature.

Bony fish have a skeleton made of bone and possess a gill cover (operculum). Cartilaginous fish have a skeleton made of cartilage and possess open gill slits instead of a gill cover.

Differences Between Bony and Cartilaginous Fish: In bony fish, the spine is made of bone, while in cartilaginous fish it is made of cartilage. In bony fish, the gills are covered by an operculum, while in cartilaginous fish the gill openings are in direct contact with the water. In bony fish, the tail fin (caudal fin) extends equally on both sides (homocercal); in cartilaginous fish, one side of the tail fin is longer than the other (heterocercal). Bony fish have a simple excretory opening called the anus, while cartilaginous fish have a more complex structure called a cloaca. Bony fish have cycloid, ctenoid, or ganoid scales, while cartilaginous fish have placoid scales. Bony fish lack nasal openings that connect to the mouth, while cartilaginous fish have spiracles. Bony fish release their eggs externally (oviparous reproduction), while in cartilaginous fish egg development occurs internally and mating occurs (ovoviviparous reproduction).
